In the previous video we went through
what keywords and expressions were.
In this video we're going to talk about
statements, what's space and indenting.
What they are and why they're
important within Java applications.
So I've created a new project called
StatementsWhiteSpaceAndIndenting.
So let's start off and
just enter a expression.
Well, actually,
we're gonna type the whole line, int.
Sorry, so int, I'm just make a bit
more space by double-clicking.
And if you recall from the previous
video when we discussed expressions
you know that the myVariable equals 50,
is the expression.
So what is a statement?
Well, a statement is the entire line.
So the entire line that reads
int myVariable equals 50;
that is a statement within Java so that
actually is the complete line if you will.
So in this case, by adding the data
tart at the start to our expression and
then finishing off with a semi colon
we've made a valid Java statement.
So Java statements can be
assignment expressions,
like the one above we're assigning
the value 50 to the variable myVariable.
We can also do something like this,
another statement would be my,
there will go plus, plus.
Which you've seen that before
in the operator videos.
MyVariable--, etc.
So those types of things
are making a complete statement.
But also method calls we haven't talked
about but will much more in the future,
that's also a statement.
And you've seen this before
when we've used [BLANK AUDIO]
the System.out.print modeIn,
that is a complete Java statement.
Because it's got, in this case,
a method call and it's got a semi colon
at the end with the parameters passed.
So semicolon is needed to complete
a Java line, to make it a statement,
in most cases, but there are exceptions
to that, and as we go through this video,
I'll talk more about those.
The other thing to keep in
mind with statements is,
they don't have to be on the one line.
So in the case above,
with the System.out.println,
what I could have done.
Like so, and Java is actually
smart enough to know that,
there’s nothing here finishing the line.
There’s no semicolon.
So therefore,
I'm gonna continue on the next line.
So what it does it collectively
adds all this together and
effectively creates the line just as
if we haven't done something like this.
So as far as Java is concerned,
that is exactly the same as what
we talked on that case below it.
So with the pluses and so forth, but
we go back to what it was before.
Back to what it was before.
That is still valid as well.
So you'll see that typed in Java code,
and often it's a good idea to do that.
To break up your current so it makes
more sense, so it's more readable.
From Java's perspective it doesn't
care if it's on one line or
on many lines, provided you're
not trying to end the lines.
So for example, if you try to put
a semicolon there, Java's gonna get into
difficulty because it's now saying,
well, there's no bracket here.
And it's expecting a bracket
because we put a terminator there.
We put the semicolon,
which is acting as a terminator to
close off the line, so to speak.
Get rid of that again, and
it should be good to go.
So we could just run that
to make sure it's working.
We get an error.
Why do we get the error?
Well, I haven't put the plus there,
have I?
So I need to put plus,
which makes it valid, and
now we should be able to run it.
And as you can see, we've got the answer
over there, so it's working fine.
The other thing is, you can have
multiple statements on the one line.
So for example,
we could put int anotherVariable = 5.
And we can then put myVariable--, like so.
So as far as Java's concerned,
that is still valid because
it's failed the separator.
And as far as it's concerned,
that's exactly the same as if
you had of typed it like that.
Now, often I would recommend not
putting statements on the same line cuz
it can get confusing.
And it just does take a little bit more
effort to figure out whether that's all
part and parcel on the same line.
But the bottom line is you can put
many things on the same line if
you wanna do that.
We could take that even further.
We could put [BLANK AUDIO],
that was IntelliJ adding this to,
going to the next line.
That was something that I did.
So we could go back there, like so,
and that is still completely valid,
as far as Java is concerned.
And we can run that, and
it quite happy as you can see.
So you can sort that when I started
topping systems, I had to print line.
IntelliJ, I tried to put
it on the next line,
because it figured it would
be better on the next line.
But the bottom line is,
you don't have to do that,
you can put them on the same
line if you want to.
And it's Java looking at it knowing
that's a complete statement because
we've got something ending a semicolon.
And it's looked at this and found out
that yes, there's a variable type, and
then there's an expression.
That's a valid line.
And looking at the code line-by-line
with semicolons, it's figuring it out.
So of course, you're gonna get
into difficulty if you're try and
not include a semicolon.
Cuz it's gonna be going,
well hang on, semicolon's expected.
There you go, that makes it valid again.
So that brings up
the concept of white space.
And the point about white space is, so
white space is this space in
between some of your expressions.
Your operands and so forth.
In the example above,
for example, I put int,
there's a space between the word int and
the variable which we've discussed
before is to make sure that Java's
aware of those separate things, but
whether you have 1 space or whether
you have 10 spaces, Java won't mind.
You can even go something like
that if you really wanted to.
You can see then that obviously that's
[LAUGH] certainly not the way that
I'd recommend you code.
But if we run that,
Java's quite happy with that syntax,
because what it's doing is, it's looking
at these spaces and, effectively,
it's gonna delete out
the spaces internally.
And as far as it's concerned,
it's going to be exactly the same
internally as that there.
So it will figure it out.
So generally speaking,
it's a good idea to use spaces to clarify
the meaning of particular things.
Another common place to put spaces
is in-between variable names and
upriders, for example.
You can see there I've got a space between
the equal sign and the variable name, and
likewise between the equal sign again and
the literal value of 50, as well.
So in general, white space,
you can do whatever you like there.
And Java will happily ignore the white
space and work quite happily.
Next is the concept of indentation.
So indentation is indenting your code so
that it's more readable.
So looking as a worse case scenario.
If we went back and changed this code and
removed all the extra spaces [BLANK
AUDIO], so I think you will agree,
if you look at that scenario there,
that is a lot harder to read,
to try and figure out where things are.
As opposed to this version.
Which is a lot more readable.
And you can see that things just
sort of stick out a little bit more.
And it's just easier to read.
So that's the concept of indenting.
And generally, the concept is,
you start typing,
you normally indent the code
from the method definition.
And I know we haven't talked about methods
yet, but we will be talking about that.
But you can see, though, the code blocks.
As we're topping in different code blocks
it's actually going into the next level,
sort of indenting as we go through.
So for example, if we have an if there,
if our variable equals 50,
you notice how IntelliJ
I just type the brace and pressed enter.
And IntelliJ is automatically go on in
four spaces and it did that automatically
and that's indenting it, so that when
we print that out it makes more sense.
If it didn't do that the code
would look like this.
And I'm sure you'd agree,
it'd be a lot harder to read.
So the concept of indenting is to make
it easy for you to see the logical flow.
Oops, I deleted that.
The logical flow of the code.
So indenting is important to make sure
that things are as they should be.
And one of the cool things is you
can't really go wrong anyway.
Because if you do mess
up the indenting and
I'm just gonna mess up a few things
here just to show you like so.
If you do mess up anyway what you can do
is you can just go up here to the Code
menu in IntelliJ, and you can click on
Reformat Code and by doing that that's
automatically reformatted it all anyway,
and it's reindented it for you.
So when in doubt, go up to the Code menu,
select Reformat Code.
Or you can use the appropriate shortcut,
which on a Mac you can
see is Cmd+Option+L.
But that will be different obviously for
a Windows or a Linux platform.
So that's statements,
white space, and indentation.
In the next video,
we're going to talk about code blocks.
What they are and why they're so
useful when coding in Java.